.TH PAI-RECOMMEND-MODEL 1 "April 2026" "PAI" "PAI User Commands"
.SH NAME
pai-recommend-model \- suggest an Ollama model sized for this hardware
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pai-recommend-model
.RI [ --name | --json | --shell | --explain | -h | --help ]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B pai-recommend-model
is the single source of truth for model sizing on PAI. It inspects
available system RAM and, when present, a supported GPU's VRAM, then
prints an Ollama model tier that will run well on this machine.
.PP
The command is consumed by the first-boot model picker
.RB ( pai-model-picker ),
the interactive
.B pai-models
TUI, the
.B pai-status
dashboard, and any future PAI tooling that needs to answer \(lqwhat
should I run here?\(rq. Calling a shared recommender keeps the sizing
logic in one place instead of drifting across consumers.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B --name
Print only the model name, suitable for scripts
.RI ( e.g. " ollama pull \(dq$(pai-recommend-model --name)\(dq" ).
.TP
.B --json
Structured JSON with every detected field (model, tier, pull_needed,
size_note, RAM, GPU, effective memory, decision source).
.TP
.B --shell
Eval-able
.B PAI_*
shell variable assignments, for scripts that want to source the
recommender rather than parse JSON.
.TP
.B --explain
Human-readable output with the reasoning behind the recommendation.
.TP
.BR -h ", " --help
Print usage and exit.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Recommendation produced.
.TP
.B 1
Could not detect system RAM.
.TP
.B 2
Usage error.
.SH EXAMPLES
Pull the recommended model in a shell script:
.PP
.RS
.EX
MODEL=$(pai-recommend-model --name)
ollama pull "$MODEL"
.EE
.RE
.PP
Source the recommendation into environment variables:
.PP
.RS
.EX
eval "$(pai-recommend-model --shell)"
echo "$PAI_MODEL needs $PAI_SIZE_NOTE"
.EE
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I /usr/local/bin/pai-recommend-model
The executable.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR pai-models (1),
.BR pai-status (1),
.BR ollama (1)
.SH AUTHOR
The PAI project \[em] https://pai.direct
